Parler tts release (#1)
sanchit-gandhi/parler-tts: training/TRAINING.md

# Training Parler-TTS

> This sub-folder contains all the information to train or finetune you own Parler-TTS model. It consists in:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This sub-folder contains all the information to train or fine-tune your own Parler-TTS model. It consists of:
```

> - [A. An introduction to Parler-TTS architecture](#a-architecture)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [A. An introduction to the Parler-TTS architecture](#a-architecture)
```

- [B. First steps to get started](#b-getting-started)
- [C. Training guide](#c-training)
- [E. Scaling up to 10.5K hours](#d-scaling-up---discussions-and-tips)

## A. Architecture

> At the moment, Parler-TTS architecture is a carbon copy of [Musicgen architecture](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.39.3/en/model_doc/musicgen#model-structure) and can be decomposed into three distinct stages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, Parler-TTS architecture is a carbon copy of the [MusicGen architecture](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.39.3/en/model_doc/musicgen#model-structure) and can be decomposed into three distinct stages:
```

> >1. Text encoder: maps the text inputs to a sequence of hidden-state representations. The pre-trained MusicGen models use a frozen text encoder from either T5 or Flan-T5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>1. Text encoder: maps the text descriptions to a sequence of hidden-state representations. Parler-TTS uses a frozen text encoder initialised entirely from Flan-T5
```

>2. Parler-TTS decoder: a language model (LM) that auto-regressively generates audio tokens (or codes) conditional on the encoder hidden-state representations

> >3. Audio encoder: used to recover the audio waveform from the audio tokens predicted by the decoder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>3. Audio codec: used to recover the audio waveform from the audio tokens predicted by the decoder. We use the [DAC model](https://github.com/descriptinc/descript-audio-codec) from Descript, although other codec models, such as [EnCodec](https://huggingface.co/facebook/encodec_48khz), can also be used
```

Parler-TTS however introduces some small tweaks:
- The text **description** is passed through the text encoder and used in the cross-attention layers of the decoder.
- The text **prompt** is simply passed through an embedding layer and concatenated to the decoder input hidden states.
- The audio encoder used is [**DAC**](https://descript.notion.site/Descript-Audio-Codec-11389fce0ce2419891d6591a68f814d5) instead of [Encodec](https://github.com/facebookresearch/encodec), as it exhibits better quality.

## B. Getting started

To get started, you need to follow a few steps:
1. Install the requirements.
2. Find or initialize the model you'll train on. 
3. Find and/or annotate the dataset you'll train your model on.

### 1. Requirements

The Parler-TTS code is written in [PyTorch](https://pytorch.org) and [Accelerate](https://huggingface.co/docs/accelerate/index). It uses some additional requirements, like [wandb](https://wandb.ai/), especially for logging and evaluation.

To install the package for training, you need to clone the repository from source...

```bash
git clone https://github.com/huggingface/parler-tts.git
cd parler-tts
```

> ... And then to install requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
... And then install the requirements:
```

```bash
pip install -e .[train]
```

> Optionnally, you can create a wandb account and login to it by following [this guide](https://docs.wandb.ai/quickstart). [`wandb`](https://docs.wandb.ai/) allows for better tracking of the experiments metrics and losses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, you can create a wandb account and login to it by following [this guide](https://docs.wandb.ai/quickstart). [`wandb`](https://docs.wandb.ai/) allows for better tracking of the experiments metrics and losses.
```

Note that we made the choice to use description of the main speech characteristics (speaker pitch, speaking rate, level of noise, etc.) but that you are free to use any handmade or generated text description that makes sense.

In the rest of this guide, and to make it simple, we'll use the [4.8K-samples clean test split](https://huggingface.co/datasets/blabble-io/libritts_r/viewer/clean/test.clean) of [LibriTTS-R](https://huggingface.co/datasets/blabble-io/libritts_r/). We've annotated LibriTTS-R using [Data-Speech](https://github.com/huggingface/dataspeech) and shared the resulting dataset here: [parler-tts/libritts_r_tags_tagged_10k_generated](https://huggingface.co/datasets/parler-tts/libritts_r_tags_tagged_10k_generated).

## C. Training

The script [`run_parler_tts_training.py`](/training/run_parler_tts_training.py) is an end-to-end script that:
1. load dataset(s) and merge them to the annotation dataset(s) if necessary
2. pre-compute audio tokens
3. train Parler-TTS

> In this example, we will train and evaluate on a subsample of the test split. This is purely to demonstrate how to use the training script, rather than recommended advice for defining train/validation splits. We advise that you train on the train splits of your dataset, evaluate and tune hyper-parameters on the validation split, and only test the final checkpoint on the test split.

Reviewer: From experience it's better to provide an example that actually gets reasonable results. I've tried in the past giving lower resource dummy examples, and what ends up happening is that some users can't figure out how to adapt them for actual training runs -> my advice here would be to include the args that will give proper training results, ideally those that were used to train the v0.1 model. This way, people can build on your work most easily

```sh
accelerate launch ./training/run_parler_tts_training.py \
    --model_name_or_path "./parler-tts-untrained-300M/parler-tts-untrained-300M/" \
    --feature_extractor_name "parler-tts/dac_44khZ_8kbps" \
    --description_tokenizer_name "google/flan-t5-base" \
    --prompt_tokenizer_name "google/flan-t5-base" \
    --report_to "wandb" \
    --overwrite_output_dir true \
    --train_dataset_name "blabble-io/libritts_r" \
    --train_metadata_dataset_name "parler-tts/libritts_r_tags_tagged_10k_generated" \
    --train_dataset_config_name "clean" \
    --train_split_name "test.clean" \
    --eval_dataset_name "blabble-io/libritts_r" \
    --eval_metadata_dataset_name "parler-tts/libritts_r_tags_tagged_10k_generated" \
    --eval_dataset_config_name "clean" \
    --eval_split_name "test.clean" \
    --target_audio_column_name "audio" \
    --description_column_name "text_description" \
    --prompt_column_name "text" \
    --max_duration_in_seconds 20 \
    --min_duration_in_seconds 2.0 \
    --add_audio_samples_to_wandb true \
    --id_column_name "id" \
    --preprocessing_num_workers 8 \
    --pad_token_id 1024 \

>     --decoder_start_token_id 1025 \

Reviewer: Decoder start and pad token ids could be set in the model init script right? They seem more relevant there no?

    --do_train true \
    --num_train_epochs 50 \
    --gradient_accumulation_steps 1 \
    --gradient_checkpointing false \
    --per_device_train_batch_size 4 \
    --learning_rate 1e-3 \
    --adam_beta1 0.9 \
    --adam_beta2 0.99 \
    --weight_decay 0.01 \
    --lr_scheduler_type "cosine" \
    --warmup_steps 40 \
    --logging_steps 2 \
    --freeze_text_encoder true \
    --do_eval true \
    --predict_with_generate true \
    --include_inputs_for_metrics true \
    --evaluation_strategy steps \
    --eval_steps 500 \
    --save_steps 5000 \
    --per_device_eval_batch_size 12 \
    --audio_encoder_per_device_batch_size 24 \
    --dtype "bfloat16" \
    --dataloader_num_workers "16" \
    --seed 456 \
    --output_dir "./output_dir_training/" \
    --temporary_save_to_disk "./audio_code_tmp/" \
    --save_to_disk "./tmp_dataset_audio/" \
    --max_eval_samples 48 \
    --max_train_samples 96 \
    --dataloader_num_workers 8
```

> [!TIP]
> Fine-tuning is as easy as modifying `model_name_or_path` to a pre-trained model.
> For example: `--model_name_or_path parler-tts/parler_tts_300M_v0.1`.

> Additionnally, you can also write a JSON config file. Here, [librispeech_tts_r_300M_dummy.json](/helpers/training_configs/librispeech_tts_r_300M_dummy.json) contains the exact same hyper-parameters than above and can be launched like that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, you can also write a JSON config file. Here, [librispeech_tts_r_300M_dummy.json](/helpers/training_configs/librispeech_tts_r_300M_dummy.json) contains the exact same hyper-parameters than above and can be launched like that:
```
